The Vice President: Ladies
and gentlemen,
this is Joe Biden, I'm filling
in for President Obama,
while he addresses the NATO
summit in Wales.
When the President and I
took office
in January of 2009, this nation
was in the midst
of the greatest economic crisis
since the great depression.
Our economy had plummeted
at a rate
of 8% in a single quarter - part
of the fastest economic
decline any time in
the last half century.
Millions of families were
falling underwater
on their homes and threatened
with foreclosure.
The iconic American
automobile
industry was under siege.
But yesterday's jobs
report was another
reminder of how
far we've come.
We've had 54 straight
months of job creation.
And that's the longest
streak
of uninterrupted job growth in
the United States' history.
We've gone from losing 9
million
jobs during the financial crisis
to creating 10 million jobs.
We've reduced the
unemployment rate
from 10% in October of 2009
to 6.1% today.
And for the first time
since the 1990s,
American manufacturing is
steadily adding jobs -
over 700,000 since 2010.
And surveys of both
American and foreign
business leaders confirm
that America
once again is viewed as the best
place in the world
to build and invest.
That's all good news.
But an awful lot of middle
class Americans
are still not feeling the
effects of this recovery.
Since the year 2000, Gross
Domestic Product -
our GDP - has risen by 25%.
And productivity in
America is up by 30%.
But middle class wages
during that same
time period have gone up by
only fourteen cents.
Folks, it's long past time
to cut the middle class back
into the deal, so they
can benefit from the economic
growth they helped create.
Folks, there used to be a
bargain in this country
supported by Democrats and
Republicans,
business and labor.
The bargain was simple.
If an employee contributed
to the growth
and profitability of the
company,
they got to share in the profits
and the benefits as well.
That's what built
the middle class.
It's time to restore the
bargain,
to deal the middle class back in.
Because, folks, when the
middle class does well,
everybody does well - the
wealthy get wealthier
and the poor have a way up.
You know, the middle
class is not a number.
It's a value set.
It means being able to
own your home;
raise your children in a safe
neighborhood;
send them to a good school where
if they do well
they can qualify to go to
college and if they get accepted
you'd be able to find a
way to be able
to send them to college.
And in the meantime, if
your parents need help,
being able to take care
of them,
and hope to put aside enough
money so that your children
will not have to take care of you.
That's the American dream.
That's what this
country was built on.
And that's what we're
determined to restore.
In order to do that, it's
time to have a fair tax
structure, one that values
paychecks
as much as unearned income and
inherited wealth,
to take some of the burden off
of the middle class.
It's time to close tax
loopholes so we can
reduce the deficit, and invest
in rebuilding America -
our bridges, our ports, our highways,
rails, providing good jobs.
With corporate profits
at near record
highs, we should encourage
corporations
to invest more in research and
development
and the salaries of
their employees.
It's time for us to invest
in educational opportunity
to guarantee that we have
the most highly skilled
workforce in the world,
for 6 out of every
10 jobs in the near term is
going to require
some education beyond high school.
Folks, it's long past due
to increase the minimum
wage that will lift
millions of hardworking
families out of poverty
and in the process
produce a ripple effect that
boosts wages
for the middle class and spurs
economic growth
for the United States of America.
Economists acknowledge
that if we do these
and other things, wages will go up and we'll increase
the Gross Domestic Product
of the United States.
My fellow Americans, we
know how to do this.
We've done it before.
It's the way we used to do
business and
we can do it that way again.
All the middle class in
this country
want is a chance.
No guarantee,
just a chance.
Americans want to work.
And when given a fair
shot, the American worker
has never, ever, ever,
let his country down.
Folks, it's never a good
bet to bet against
the American people.
Thanks for listening.
May God bless you, and may
God protect our troops.